>> Ifill: THERE WERE REPORTS
TODAY A MISSING MALAYSIAN
JETLINER MIGHT HAVE VEERED FAR
OFF COURSE AT THE TIME IT
DISAPPEARED, ADDING TO CONFUSION
OVER WHAT BECAME OF THE PLANE,
AND THE 239 PEOPLE ON BOARD.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ALSO AHEAD THIS TUESDAY, CRIMEA
TOOK FURTHER STEPS TODAY TO PLOT
OUT ITS BREAK-UP WITH UKRAINE,
WHILE PARTS OF EASTERN EUROPE,
WARY OF MOSCOW'S NEXT MOVES,
SHOWED OFF THEIR MILITARY TIES
TO THE U.S.
>> Ifill: PLUS, THE BRUTALLY
COLD WINTER HIT THE MIDWEST
ESPECIALLY HARD.
WE VENTURE OUT TO WITNESS A RARE
SIGHT: THE GREAT LAKES ENCASED
IN ICE.
>> IT'S ALMO LIKSTE BEING IN
ANOTHER WORLD IT DOESN'T FEEL
LIKE YOU'RE OUT ON THE LAKE AT
ALL.
IT'S LIKE LOOKING OUT AT THE ICE
ITS ALMOST LIKE YOU'RE LOOKING
AT THE SURFACE OF THE MOON OR
SOMETHING LIKE THAT BECAUSE IT
JUST GOES FOR MILES AND MILES.
>> Ifill: THOSE ARE JUST SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: THE SEARCH FOR THAT
MISSING MALAYSIAN AIRLINES
FLIGHT TOOK AN UNEXPECTED TURN
TODAY.
IT NOW DEVELOPS THAT THE PLANE
WAS SPOTTED HUNDREDS OF MILES
FROM WHERE IT WAS SUPPOSED TO
BE.
JOHN SPARKS OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS HAS THIS REPORT
FROM KUALA LUMPUR.
>> Reporter: IT'S GOT TO BE
THERE, BUT NO ONE KNOWS WHERE.
FOR THE FOURTH DAY IN A ROW, A
SMALL ARMADA OF SHIPS, PLANES
AND HELICOPTERS SCOURED THE
WATERS AROUND MALAYSIA LOOKING
FOR THE JET LINER AND ITS
PASSENGERS AND CREW, AND FOR THE
FOURTH DAY IN A ROW THEY FOUND
NOTHING.
HERE'S A MEMBER OF THE
VIETNAMESE RESCUE TEAM.
>> SOME OBJECTS WERE SPOTTED IN
THIS AREA, SO WE CAME RIGHT
HERE, BUT WE HAVEN'T FOUND A
THING.
>> Reporter: THEY'VE GOT
LITTLE TO GO ON, AND WHAT THEY
DO HAVE IS CONTRADICTORY.
TODAY, A MALAYSIAN MILITARY
SOURCE SAID THE PLANE WASN'T
HEADED TO BEIJING, ITS INTENDED
DESTINATION -- INSTEAD, IT
CHANGED COURSE.
ON SATURDAY MORNING FLIGHT 370
LEFT KUALA LUMPUR AND WE WERE
TOLD CIVILIAN RADAR LOST CONTACT
WITH IT HERE IN THE MOUTH OF THE
GULF OF THAILAND.
HOWEVER, MILITARY RADAR SHOWS
THE AIRCRAFT VEERING WEST THEN
FLYING OVER THE MALIKA STRAITS
FOR AN HOUR.
IT'S A BIG DISCREPANCY FOR THOSE
TRYING TO FIND IT.
STILL, MALAYSIAN POLICE
ELIMINATED ONE LINE OF INQUIRY
TODAY.
THEY PROVIDED NEW DETAILS ABOUT
THE IDENTITIES OF TWO MEN WHO
BOARDED THE FLIGHT WITH STOLEN
PASSPORTS.
HERE'S THE FIRST.
>> HE IS 19 YEARS OLD.
WE BELIEVE THAT HE IS --
>> Reporter: HIS NAME, MOHAMED
MADAD AND POLICE SAID HIS
JOURNEY HAD NOTHING TO DO WITH
TERROR.
>> WE BELIEVE HE IS NOT LIKELY
TO BE A MEMBER OF ANY TERRORIST
GROUP, AND WE BELIEVE THAT HE IS
TRYING TO MIGRATE TO GERMANY.
>> Reporter: THE SECOND MAN
LATER IDENTIFIED AS MOHAMED SYED
ERSA.
THE PRESS CONFERENCE WAS ANOTHER
RAUCOUS AFFAIR WITH JOURNALISTS
SCRAPPING FOR A PICTURE OF THE
TWO MEN.
INTEREST IN THE PLANE'S
DISAPPEARANCE IS INTENSE AND THE
MEDIA HAS HAD LITTLE UNTIL NOW
TO PASS ON.
AT A BEIJING HOTEL, FRIENDS AND
RELATIVES OF THOSE ON BOARD
CONTINUE THEIR VIGIL.
THE FOURTH DAY HAS BROUGHT THEM
LITTLE.
A SMALL NUMBER DECIDED TO TRAVEL
TO MALAYSIA, BETTER TO DO
SOMETHING, PERHAPS, THAN SIT AND
WAIT.
>> Woodruff: FOR MORE, WE TURN
TO PETER GOELZ IN WASHINGTON,
FORMER MANAGING DIRECTOR OF THE
NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY
BOARD.
PETER GOELZ, THANK YOU VERY MUCH
FOR JOINING US.
I JUST WANT TO POINT OUT THAT,
AT THIS HOUR, THERE ARE STILL
CONFLICTING ACCOUNTS OF WHERE
THE PLANE WAS WHEN IT WAS LAST
HEARD FROM.
HAVING SAID THAT, IT DOES APPEAR
THE TRANSPONDER ON THE PLANE WAS
EITHER TURNED OFF OR STOPPED
WORKING AT THE SAME POINT THE
PLANE TOOK A SHARP TURN.
TELL US QUICKLY, REMIND US, WHAT
IS A TRANSPONDER AND WHAT WOULD
BE THE EXPLANATIONS FOR IT BEING
TURNED OFF?
>> WELL, THE TRANCE PONDER IS A
CRITICAL PIECE OF ELECTRONICS ON
EVERY AIRPLANE AND WHEN THE
AIRCRAFT IS INTERRUPTED BY A
RADAR SIGNAL, IT RESPONDS BACK
AND SAYS, I'M AIRCRAFT 427, I'M
AT THIS ALTITUDE, I'M GOING AT
THIS SPEED.
SO IT IDENTIFIES THE AIRCRAFT
FOR AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLERS AND
FOR OTHER AIRCRAFT IN THE AREA.
THERE IS LITTLE REASON TO EVER
TURN OFF YOUR TRANSPONDER
BECAUSE IT IS ESSENTIAL THAT THE
CONTROLLERS SEE YOU, THAT OTHER
AIRCRAFT SEE YOU, THAT YOU ARE
IDENTIFIED IN THE SKY.
NOW, EVEN IN AN EMERGENCY
SITUATION, THE TRANSPONDER USES
VERY LITTLE ELECTRICAL POWER.
IT WOULD BE ONE OF THE LAST
ITEMS YOU SHOULD SHUT DOWN IN
SOME SORT OF INEXPLICABLE
ELECTRICAL MALFUNCTION.
>> Reporter:.
>>oodr Wuff: WOULD IT REQUIRE
A HUMAN GESTURE TO TURN IT OFF
OR A MECHANICAL OR ELECTRICAL
FAILURE?
>> WOULD MOST LIKELY TAKE A
HUMAN ACTION TO TURN IT OFF.
THE IDEA THAT A MALFUNCTION
WOULD TAKE PLACE IS VERY
UNUSUAL.
>> Woodruff: AND WHAT ARE THE
PILOT'S OPTIONS IN THIS CASE?
THERE ARE REPORTS THAT THE PLANE
CONTINUED FLYING FOR AT LEAST
ANOTHER HOUR BEFORE APPARENTLY
THEY LOST CONTACT ALTOGETHER.
WHAT DOES THAT TELL YOU?
>> WELL, IT TELLS YOU THAT
SOMETHING IS GOING ON IN THE
FLIGHT DECK, IN THE COCKPIT,
THAT SHOULDN'T HAVE.
THERE WAS SOMETHING HAPPENING,
EITHER THERE WAS SOME SORT OF
TAKEOVER OF THE COCKPIT, THERE
WAS SOME SORT OF DECISION MADE
BY THE FLIGHT CREW THAT WAS
OUTSIDE THE NORM AND IT IS NOT
BEYOND THE REALM OF POSSIBILITY
THAT ONE OF THE FLIGHT CREW
MEMBERS TOOK OVER THE AIRCRAFT.
>> Woodruff: QUICKLY, DOES
THIS NEW PIECE OF INFORMATION IN
YOUR MIND MAKE IT MORE OR LESS
LIKELY THERE WAS FOUL PLAY OF
SOME KIND?
>> I THINK IT MOVES THE ISSUE OF
FOUL PLAY UP.
THE INVESTIGATION APPEARS TO BE
MANAGED BY THE MILITARY AND IT
HAS NOT GONE TO THE CIVIL
AVIATION AUTHORITIES.
THEY HAVE NOT STARTED AN
ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION SO THE
U.S. IS NOT FULLY PARTICIPATING
YET OR OTHER COUNTRIES.
IT'S VERY TROUBLING ON HOW THE
INFORMATION IS BEING MANAGED.
>> Woodruff: MANY QUESTIONS
STILL REMAIN.
PETER GOELZ, THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: IN UKRAINE,
CRIMEA'S PARLIAMENT VOTED TODAY
TO DECLARE INDEPENDENCE, IF IT'S
PEOPLE VOTE IN FAVOR OF JOINING
RUSSIA.
A REFERENDUM IS SCHEDULED FOR
SUNDAY.
MEANWHILE, THE PRIME MINISTER OF
UKRAINE APPEALED TO RUSSIA, THE
U.S. AND BRITAIN TO ABIDE BY A
1994 TREATY.
IT GUARANTEED UKRAINE'S SECURITY
IN EXCHANGE FOR GIVING UP
SOVIET-ERA NUCLEAR WEAPONS.
>> WE ARE NOT ASKING ANYONE FOR
ANYTHING EXTRAORDINARY.
WE ARE ASKING FOR JUST ONE
THING: MILITARY AGGRESSION HAS
BEEN USED AGAINST OUR COUNTRY.
THOSE WHO GUARANTEED THAT THIS
AGGRESSION WILL NOT TAKE PLACE,
MUST FROM THE ONE SIDE PULL OUT
TROOPS AND FROM THE OTHER SIDE
MUST DEFEND OUR INDEPENDENT,
SOVEREIGN STATE.
THIS IS THE DEMAND OF OUR
COUNTRY.
>> Woodruff: THE UKRAINIAN PRIME
MINISTER IS TRAVELING TO
WASHINGTON TO MEET WITH
PRESIDENT OBAMA TOMORROW.
THE TOP U.S. AND RUSSIAN
DIPLOMATS TALKED AGAIN TODAY,
BUT MADE NO PROGRESS TOWARD
RESOLVING THE UKRAINIAN CRISIS.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
SPOKE BY TELEPHONE WITH RUSSIAN
FOREIGN MINISTER SERGEI LAVROV.
THE STATE DEPARTMENT SAID IT WAS
NOT SATISFIED WITH THE RUSSIAN'S
RESPONSES.
MOSCOW SAID THE TWO SIDES WILL
KEEP TALKING.
A STUDENT LEADER IN VENEZUELA
WAS SHOT AND KILLED LAST NIGHT,
AMID THE GROWING PROTESTS IN
THAT COUNTRY.
IT HAPPENED IN SAN CRISTOBAL,
WHERE ANTI-GOVERNMENT
DEMONSTRATIONS FIRST ERUPTED
LAST MONTH.
NATIONAL GUARDSMEN BATTLED
STUDENTS IN RESIDENTIAL
NEIGHBORHOODS, FIRING TEAR GAS
AND PLASTIC PELLETS.
A DISPUTE BETWEEN THE C.I.A. AND
THE CHAIR OF THE SENATE
INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEE BLEW UP
PUBLICLY TODAY.
CALIFORNIA DEMOCRAT DIANNE
FEINSTEIN ACCUSED THE AGENCY OF
IMPROPERLY SEARCHING A COMPUTER
NETWORK SET UP FOR SENATORS TO
REVIEW CLASSIFIED MATERIAL.
IT WAS PART OF A PROBE INTO
INTERROGATIONS OF TERROR
SUSPECTS.
>> THE C.I.A.'S SEARCH MAY WELL
HAVE VIOLATED THE SEPARATION OF
POWERS PRINCIPLES EMBODIED IN
THE UNITED STATES CONSTITUTION,
INCLUDING THE SPEECH AND DEBATE
CLAUSE.
IT MAY HAVE UNDERMINED THE
CONSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
ESSENTIAL TO EFFECTIVE
CONGRESSIONAL OVERSIGHT OF
INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES OR ANY
OTHER GOVERNMENT FUNCTION.
>> Woodruff: THE HEAD OF THE
C.I.A., JOHN BRENNAN, LATER
DISPUTED ANY CLAIM THAT THE
AGENCY TRIED TO OBSTRUCT THE
SENATE INVESTIGATION.
HE SPOKE AT AN EVENT IN
WASHINGTON.
>> WE ARE NOT TRYING AT ALL TO
PREVENT ITS RELEASE.
AS FAR AS THE ALLEGATIONS OF,
YOU KNOW, CIA HACKING INTO, YOU
KNOW, SENATE COMPUTERS, NOTHING
COULD BE FURTHER FROM THE TRUTH.
I MEAN WE WOULDN'T DO THAT.
WHEN THE FACTS COME OUT ON THIS,
I THINK A LOT OF PEOPLE WHO ARE
CLAIMING THAT THERE HAS BEEN
THIS TREMENDOUS SORT OF SPYING
AND MONITORING AND HACKING WILL
BE PROVED WRONG.
>> Woodruff: THE ISSUE HAS NOW
BEEN REFERRED TO THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT TO DETERMINE IF THERE
WERE ANY CRIMINAL WRONGDOING.
>> Woodruff: JAPAN TODAY MARKED
THE THIRD ANNIVERSARY OF THE
2011 EARTHQUAKE AND TSUNAMI THAT
KILLED 19,000 PEOPLE
AND TRIGGERED A NUCLEAR PLANT
MELTDOWN.
THE QUAKE WAS THE STRONGEST IN
JAPAN'S HISTORY, AND THE MASSIVE
TSUNAMI WAVE WIPED OUT ENTIRE
COASTAL COMMUNITIES WITH LITTLE
WARNING.
THREE YEARS LATER, 270,000
PEOPLE ARE STILL DISPLACED.
TODAY, PRIME MINISTER SHINZO ABE
PLEDGED TO DO MORE TO REBUILD.
ON WALL STREET, THE DOW JONES
INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE LOST 67
POINTS TO CLOSE AT 16,351.
THE NASDAQ FELL 27 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 4,307.
AND THE STANDARD AND POOR'S 500
WAS DOWN NINE POINTS TO FINISH
AT 1,867.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
WHAT'S NEXT IF CRIMEA REUNITES
WITH RUSSIA; PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
UNCONVENTIONAL HEALTH-CARE PUSH;
A NEW NOVEL IMAGINES A FUTURE
WORLD AND WHAT IT SAYS ABOUT OUR
TIME; PLUS, THE GREAT LAKES TURN
TO ICE.
>> Ifill: THE CRISIS IN THE
UKRAINE, WHICH HAS PITTED EUROPE
AND THE U.S. AGAINST A RE-
EXPANDING RUSSIA ENTERED A NEW
PHASE TODAY.
>> Ifill: WAR GAMES BEGAN IN
POLAND TODAY, AS U.S. AND POLISH
FORCES PERFORMED JOINT AIR AND
NAVAL EXERCISES.
THEY WERE LONG-PLANNED, BUT HAVE
NOW BECOME PART OF THE U.S.
RESPONSE TO RUSSIA'S SEIZING
MUCH OF CRIMEA, A UKRAINIAN
REGION WHERE ETHNIC RUSSIANS
PREDOMINATE.
RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN
SUGGESTED LAST WEEK HE COULD
INTERVENE ELSEWHERE AS WELL.
>> ( translated ): IF WE SEE
THAT LAWLESSNESS STARTING IN
EASTERN REGIONS TOO, IF PEOPLE
ASK US FOR HELP
WE RESERVE THE RIGHT TO USE ALL
OPTIONS AT OUR DISPOSAL TO
PROTECT THOSE CITIZENS.
>> Ifill: ON FRIDAY'S NEWSHOUR,
JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF CHAIRMAN
MARTIN DEMPSEY SAID SUCH ACTION
WOULD BE DANGEROUS.
>> IF RUSSIA IS ALLOWED TO DO
THIS, WHICH IS TO SAY MOVE INTO
A SOVEREIGN COUNTRY UNDER THE
GUISE OF PROTECTING ETHNIC
RUSSIANS IN UKRAINE, IT EXPOSES
EASTERN EUROPE TO SOME
SIGNIFICANT RISK, BECAUSE THERE
ARE ETHNIC ENCLAVES ALL OVER
EASTERN EUROPE AND THE BALKANS.
>> Ifill: INDEED, MUCH OF
EASTERN UKRAINE DOES HAVE
SIZEABLE RUSSIAN-SPEAKING
POPULATIONS.
AND OTHER NATIONS IN THE REGION,
INCLUDING MOLDOVA, BELARUS AND
THE BALTIC STATES OF LITHUANIA,
LATVIA, AND ESTONIA, ARE ALSO
HOME TO LARGE NUMBERS OF ETHNIC
RUSSIANS.
THIS ISN'T THE FIRST TIME MOSCOW
HAS MOVED TO ANNEX REGIONS
BEYOND ITS BORDERS.
DURING THE FIVE DAYS WAR IN
2008, RUSSIA EFFECTIVELY GAINED
CONTROL OV PORERTIONS OF
NEIGHBORING GEORGIA.
ESTONIA'S FOREIGN MINISTER SAID
TODAY THE ENTIRE CONTINENT
SHOULD BE CONCERNED.
>> ( translated ): RUSSIAN
AGGRESSION CHANGES THE SITUATION
FOR THE WHOLE OF EUROPE, IT
INFLUENCES EUROPE'S SECURITY.
AND THE FACT THAT RUSSIA USES
ITS POWER TO PROTECT RUSSIANS
LIVING ABROAD AFFECTS ALL
EUROPEAN COUNTRIES AS RUSSIANS
LIVE ALL OVER EUROPE.
>> Ifill: IN THE FACE OF THAT
PROSPECT, THE EUROPEAN UNION IS
TALKING SANCTIONS.
THE U.S. HAS ALREADY IMPOSED
SOME PENALTIES AND TRAVEL BANS.
AND STARTING THURSDAY, IN
ADDITION, A DOZEN MORE AMERICAN
F-16 FIGHTER JETS WILL ARRIVE IN
POLAND.
F-15'S ARE HEADED TO LITHUANIA,
AND N.A.T.O. IS STEPPING UP
RECONNAISSANCE FLIGHTS OVER
POLAND AND ROMANIA.
>> Ifill: SO IS RUSSIA'S REACH
INTO CRIMEA A SIGN OF THINGS TO
COME?
FOR THAT, WE TURN TO:
NADIA DIUK, VICE PRESIDENT AT
THE NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR
DEMOCRACY.
SHE'S WRITTEN EXTENSIVELY ABOUT
RUSSIA AND THE SOVIET UNION.
AND JANUSZ BUGAJSKI, A SENIOR
ASSOCIATE AT THE CENTER FOR
STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL
STUDIES, WHERE HE FOCUSES ON
EUROPE.
IS GENERAL DEMPSEY CORRECT IN
HIS FEAR THAT VLADIMIR PUTIN MAY
HAVE GREATER AMBITIONS BEYOND
CRIMEA?
>> I THINK HE'S ABSOLUTELY
CORRECT, AND I THINK THERE'S A
PALPABLE FEAR THROUGHOUT EASTERN
EUROPE THAT THE RUSSIAN
GOVERNMENT NO LONGER RESPECTS
THE BORDERS OF EUROPE, THE MAP
OF EUROPE, THAT IT WILL
UNILATERALLY CHANGE THE BORDERS
OF ITS NEIGHBORS ON THE PRO TEXT
WHETHER DEFENDING MINORITY
RIGHTS, RESTORING LAW AND ORDER
OR WHATEVER IT IS IN ORDER TO
TRY TO EXPAND ITS INFLUENCE AND
CONTROL OVER PARTS OF
TERRITORIES OF NEIGHBORING
COUNTRIES.
>> Ifill: NADIA DIUK, SAME
QUESTION TO YOU.
>> YES, I THINK THIS PUSH INTO
CRIMEA IS PARTLY FOR INTERNAL
PURPOSES FOR PUTIN.
HE'S CREATING THIS SORT OF AREA
OF A RUSSIAN WORLD WHICH HE
DOESN'T BELIEVE THAT UKRAINE
ACTUALLY IS SEPARATE FROM RUSSIA
AND THAT RUSSIAN WORLD ALSO
INCLUDES BELARUS AND, AS WELL, I
THINK IT'S HIS PURPOSE -- OR,
RATHER, THE PURPOSE TO HAVE THE
KREMLIN IDEOLOGY THAT
ACCOMPANIES THIS RUSSIAN WORLD
IS TO HAVE A SORT OF BOUT OF
DESTABILIZED TERRITORIES AROUND
RUSSIA.
SO WHO KNOWS.
I MEAN, THIS MAY GO EVEN
FURTHER.
THE LATVIANS MUST BE HAVING A
SENSE OF DEJA VU WITH THE
SO-CALLED REFERENDUM COMING UP
SUNDAY WHERE THERE'S BASICALLY
NO CHOICE GIVEN TO THE CRIMEANS,
EITHER STAY WITH RUSSIA OR
CREATE A SORT OF AUTONOMOUS
STATE AS EXISTED THERE UNDER A
CONSTITUTION THAT WAS -- THAT
EXISTED BETWEEN 1992 AND '95.
SO, IN FACT, THEY HAVE BEEN
GIVEN NOT MUCH CHOICE, THE SAME
WAY LATVIA WAS TAKEN OVER IN
1940 WHEN THE RUSSIAN TROOPS
WERE INVITED IN BY A PUP ET
GOVERNMENT THAT VOTED TO DO SO.
>> Reporter: LET ME ASK JANUSZ
BUGAJSKI ABOUT ANOTHER WORRIED
NATION, AND THAT'S MOLDOVA.
SHE MENTIONED LATVIA.
WHAT IS THE SITUATION WITH MULL
DOVIA.
>> THE RUSSIAN GOVERNMENT SET
ITS PRECEDENT ALREADY IN THAT IT
DIVIDED MULL DOVIA AFTER THE
SOVIET UNION COLLAPSED.
IT HELPED FOUR SEPARATIST
MOVEMENTS WITHIN MOLDOVA AND
CONTINUED TO KEEP MOLDOVA
DIVIDED AND HAS NOT ATTEMPTED TO
STABILIZE OR PREVENTING THESE
COUNTRIES MOVING INTO THE
EUROPEAN UNION AND THE WESTERN
COMMUNITY.
RUSSIA, IF IT CANNOT CONTROL A
COUNTRY, WANTS TO KEEP THE
COUNTRY UNSTABLE AND THREATENED
WITH FURTHERR MOLDOVA, I THINK E
CONCERNED THAT THE CRIMEAN
PRECEDENT OF DECLARING A UNIFIED
STATE WITH RUSSIA CAN SET UP A
TRANSITION REGION WITH MUL MUL .
>> THERE'S A PLACE CALLED CALLAN
GRAD WHICH IS BETWEEN LITHUANIA
AND POLAND RIGHT NOW AND THAT IS
ACTUALLY PART OF RUSSIA, THAT
COULD BE A STAGING GROUND FOR
ALL SORTS OF INCURSIONS.
SO POLAND TRADITIONALLY SUFFERED
FROM A LOT OF RUSSIAN OVERREACH,
SO NOT SURPRISING THAT THEY
WOULD BE WORRIED RIGHT NOW.
I WOULD SAY GERMANY MAYBE SHOULD
BE WORRIED, TOO.
THERE ARE HALF A MILLION ETHNIC
PEOPLE IN GERMANY, 5 1/2 MILLION
ETHNIC RUSSIANS IN GERMANY AND
NATIVE RUSSIAN SPEAKERS.
>> Ifill: THE PRESENCE OF
ETHNIC RUSSIANS AND THE NUMBERS
OF ETHNIC RUSSIANS IN ANY REGION
MAKE THEM VULNERABLE?
>> THIS IS WHAT THE KREMLIN
DOES.
IT'S NOT JUST A QUESTION OF
ETHNIC RUSSIANS.
THEY'VE EXPANDED THE DEFINITIONS
OF THE PEOPLE THEY'RE ENTITLED
TO PROTECT TO INCLUDE ANYBODY
WHO SPEAKS RUSSIAN AS A FIRST OR
EVEN SECOND LANGUAGE --
>> Ifill: THE DISTINCTION SHE
JUST MADE.
>> RIGHT, COMPATRIOTS, SO
NEW YORK, PARTS OF CALIFORNIA
COULD BE AN EXED.
IT OPENS A PANDORA'S BOX OF
POSSIBLE A ANNEXATION OF NUMERAL
STATES IN RUSSIA.
>> Ifill: HOW DOES THIS
COMPARE TO WHAT HAPPENED IN
GEORGIA?
>> SIMILAR.
RUSSIA PARTITIONED GEORGIA.
THEY PROVOKED THE GEORGIANS INTO
REACTING AND CAME IN ON THE
PRETEXT OF DEFENDING THE PEOPLE
FROM GEORGIAN CONQUEST WHEN
REALLY THIS WAS ALREADY A PART
OF GEORGIA.
>> Ifill: ASSUMING VLADIMIR
PUTIN IS TRYING TO ANNEX GERMANY
OR NEW YORK, IS THIS REALLY
ABOUT TRYING TO UNDERMINE THE
UKRAINIAN GOVERNMENT AS IT WAS
PUT IN PLACE A FEW WEEKS AGO OR
ACTUALLY TRYING TO TAKE CRIMEA
BACK?
>> WELL, I THINK HE HIT THE NAIL
ON THE HEAD.
I THINK A LOT OF THIS IS ABOUT
TRYING TO CONTINUE TO
DESTABILIZE.
IF THE EX-PRESIDENT YANUKOVICH
WHO WAS IN A SENSE A PUP ET OF
MOSCOW WAS NOT TO REMAIN
PRESIDENT OF UKRAINE, YOU RECALL
THAT HE WAS SORT OF THROWN OUT
REALLY BECAUSE HE WAS LEADING A
VERY CORRUPT GOVERNMENT, THEN I
THINK A PLAN B IS TO CONTINUE TO
DESTABILIZE THE COUNTRY SO THAT
THE NEW ELECTION CANNOT TAKE
PLACE.
THEY HAVE ELECTIONS -- UKRAINE
HAS ELECTIONS SCHEDULED FOR
MAY 25th.
THERE'S A NARRATIVE GOING OUT
NOW THAT, OH, WELL, MAYBE WE
SHOULDN'T BE LOOKING TO THESE
ELECTIONS AS BEING GENUINE
BECAUSE SOME OF THE PEOPLE WHO
WOULD BE RUNNING HAVE SHADY
BACKGROUNDS IN TERMS OF
EXTREMISM, RADICALISM AND
ANTISEMITISM, BECAUSE THERE'S
ALSO ANOTHER SORT OF INSTRUMENT
IN THE TOOLBOX OF THE KREMLIN TO
TRY TO PROMOTE THAT
DESTABILIZATION.
>> Ifill: THERE'S AN ARGUMENT
THAT'S BEEN MADE, KNOWING HOW
PUTIN FELT ABOUT CRIMEA, THAT
NONE OF THE NATIONS SHOULD HAVE
BEEN GRAVITATING TOWARD THE
EUROPEAN UNION AT ALL AND THIS
WOULDN'T HAVE HAPPENED.
>> I THINK IT WOULD HAVE
HAPPENED ANYWAY.
IT'S A FREE CHOW CHOICE OF EVERY
NATION WHO EMERGED FROM THE
COMMUNEST BLOCK TO BELONG TO THE
UNITED NATIONS TO PROTECT THEIR
SECURITY AND PROSPERITY AND
DEVELOPMENT.
ALL THE CENTRAL EUROPEAN
COUNTRIES, ALMOST, HAVE CHOSEN
TO ALLY WITH THE WEST BECAUSE
THE EUROPEAN UNION AND NATO
PROVIDES THE SECURITY,
STABILITY, SOVEREIGNTY AND
DEVELOPMENT.
THE RUSSIAN WORLD, THE CUSTOMS
UNION, THE EURASIAN UNION WILL
BE A SOURCE OF STABILITY BECAUSE
RUSSIA CANNOT PROVIDE THAT
SECURITY, INTEGRITY AND NATIONAL
INDEPENDENCE.
>> Ifill: NADIA DIUK,
FINALWARD ON THE POINT, WHETHER
MOVING TOWARD THE E.U. IS WORTH
IT OR WORTH IT FOR THE OTHER
NATIONS WHO NOW FEAR THEY MAY BE
TARGETS.
>> WELL, I MEAN, YOU HAVE TO
REMEMBER WHAT HAPPENED PRIOR TO
THIS ANNEXATION OF CRIMEA.
THERE WERE UKRAINIANS WHO WERE
LEAVING AND, IN THE CASE OF
ABOUT 100 PEOPLE DYING ON THE
EURO MIDAN, WHOSE PRIMARY AIM
WAS TO SUPPORT UKRAINE'S
INTEGRATION INTO EUROPE, SO THE
UKRAINIANS OBVIOUSLY THINK THAT
IT'S WORTH HAVING A BIG
SACRIFICE IN ORDER TO PRESERVE
THE FUTURE FOR THEIR CHILDREN
AND FOR THEIR GRANDCHILDREN AND
MANY HAVE DESIRE.
>> Ifill: NADIA DIUK FOR THE
NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR DEMOCRACY
AND JANUSZ BUGAJSKI, SENIOR
ASSOCIATE AT THE CENTER FOR
STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL
STUDIES.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION ANNOUNCED TODAY
THAT 4.2 MILLION PEOPLE HAVE
SIGNED UP FOR ENROLLMENT SO FAR
IN THE HEALTH INSURANCE
EXCHANGES.
THAT'S A PACE THAT WOULD MAKE IT
HARD TO REACH THE ORIGINAL GOAL
OF SEVEN MILLION THIS YEAR.
WITH JUST WEEKS TO GO, THE
ADMINISTRATION IS WORKING HARD
NOW TO PINPOINT SPECIFIC GROUPS
OF THE UNINSURED, AND SELL THEM
ON THE ADVANTAGES OF SIGNING UP.
>> I HAVE TO SAY, WHEN I HEARD,
LIKE, PEOPLE ACTUALLY WATCH THIS
SHOW, I WAS ACTUALLY PRETTY
SURPRISED.
>> Sssh!
Sssh!
Hi.
>> Woodruff: IN AN OFFBEAT
VIDEO, APPEARING TODAY ON THE
WEBSITE "FUNNY OR DIE,"
PRESIDENT OBAMA JOINS COMEDIAN
AND ACTOR ZACH GALIFIANAKIS IN A
SERIES OF COMIC EXCHANGES.
BUT HIS REAL PURPOSE IS
MARKETING THE HEALTH CARE LAW TO
YOUNG PEOPLE.
>> HAVE YOU HEARD OF THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT?
>> OH YEAH I HEARD ABOUT THAT.
THAT'S THE THING THAT DOESN'T
WORK?
>> HEALTHCARE DOT GOV WORKS
GREAT NOW.
AND MILLIONS OF AMERICANS HAVE
ALREADY GOTTEN HEALTH INSURANCE
PLANS AND WHAT WE WANT IS FOR
PEOPLE TO KNOW THAT YOU CAN GET
AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE.
MOST YOUNG AMERICANS RIGHT NOW,
THEY'RE NOT COVERED
>> Woodruff: IT'S ALL PART OF A
FINAL WHITE HOUSE PUSH WITH THE
MARCH 31 ENROLLMENT DEADLINE
FAST APPROACHING FOR THE
UNINSURED.
HEALTHY YOUNG PEOPLE, WHO OFTEN
PAY MUCH MORE IN PREMIUMS THAN
THEY USE IN CLAIMS, ARE
ESPECIALLY CRITICAL TO THE LAW'S
SUCCESS.
TO REACH THEM, THE
ADMINISTRATION HAS ALSO ENLISTED
FORMER PRO BASKETBALL ARS.ST
>> Woodruff: ENTERTAINERS...
>> AND IF YOU NEED THAT NEW
HEALTH CARE, SIGN UP CAUSE IT'S
HOT, SIGN UP CAUSE IT'S HOT.
>> Woodruff: AND MOTHERS...
SINGER-SONGWRITER CAROLE KING.
>> ENROLL TODAY.
THAT'S WHAT I'D SAY TO MY KIDS.
>> QUIERO REGISTRARME, ES UNA
BUENA IDEA.
>> Woodruff: THE CAMPAIGN IS
ALSO REACHING OUT TO LATINOS.
A NEW GALLUP POLL FINDS THEY
TRAIL ALMOST EVERY OTHER
DEMOGRAPHIC GROUP IN ENROLLING
FOR COVERAGE.
IT'S PARTLY DUE TO FEARS THAT
THOSE WHO DO SIGN UP MIGHT PUT
ANY RELATIVES HERE ILLEGALLY IN
DANGER OF DEPORTATION.
THE PRESIDENT SOUGHT TO ASSUAGE
THAT CONCERN IN A VIRTUAL TOWN
HALL HOSTED BY SPANISH-LANGUAGE
TV NETWORKS LAST WEEK.
MEANWHILE, THE DEADLINE IS NOW
JUST 20 DAYS OFF.
ONCE IT PASSES, THOSE STILL
WITHOUT COVERAGE COULD FACE
FINES.
>> Woodruff: FOR SOME FURTHER
INSIGHT INTO THE SELLING OF THE
EXCHANGES, AND HOW IT MAY IMPACT
THE INSURANCE POOL, WE TURN TO
TWO PEOPLE WHO ARE WATCHING THIS
CLOSELY.
JOANNE KENEN IS THE HEALTH CARE
EDITOR AT POLITICO.
AND LARRY LEVITT IS A SENIOR
VICE PRESIDENT AT THE KAISER
FAMILY FOUNDATION.
WELCOME TO YOU BOTH.
LARRY LEVITT, GIVE US A
DESCRIPTION OF THE PEOPLE WHO
HAVE SIGNED UP FOR THESE
EXCHANGES SO FAR IN TERMS OF
OTHER WOMEN, MEN, AGE, INCOME
LEVEL AND SO FORTH.
>> WELL, AS YOUR PIECE
MENTIONED, A TOTAL OF
4.2 MILLION PEOPLE HAVE SIGNED
UP FOR HEALTH INSURANCE SO FAR.
THEY ARE MOSTLY WOMEN, SLIGHTLY
MORE LIKELY TO BE WOMEN, MOSTLY
LOW-INCOME, ABOUT 80% QUALIFY
FOR TAX CRIT CREDITS AVAILABLE W
AND MIDDLE INCOME PEOPLE AND
PROPORTIONALLY OLDER.
18-44 REPRESENT ABOUT 40% OF THE
TARGET POPULATION BUT ONLY ABOUT
A QUARTER HAVE ENROLLED.
>> Woodruff: WHO HAVEN'T BEEN
SIGNING UP?
AND WHY?
>> YOUNG PEOPLE AREN'T SIGNING
UP.
INSURANCE IS A TOUGH SELL FOR
YOUNG PEOPLE TO BEGIN WITH.
AS YOUR PIECE MENTIONED, THEY DO
PAY HIGHER PREMIUMS THAN THEY
TEND TO USE IN HEALTHCARE.
SO IT'S NOT AS GOOD A DEAL FOR
THEM AS OLDER PEOPLE.
ENROLLMENT AMONG LATINOS A
LAGGING AS WELL.
IN CALIFORNIA, THEY REPRESENT
ABOUT HALF OF THE ELIGIBLE
UNINSURED BUT ONLY ONE IN FIVE
OF ENROLLEES.
SO A TOUGH SELL FOR THE LATINO
MARKET.
>> Woodruff: DOES THE
ADMINISTRATION KNOW WHY THE
OTHER GROUPS AREN'T SIGNING UP?
>> THEY'VE KNOWN THE YOUNG
PEOPLE WILL BE A HARD SELL FROM
THE BEGINNING.
LATINOS, THESE BENEFITS ARE ONLY
AVAILABLE TO PEOPLE WHO ARE HERE
LEGALLY.
BUT IF YOU HAVE A RELATIVE WHO'L
IT IS A PERCEPTION THAT IF YOU
GIVE YOUR INFORMATION TO THE
GOVERNMENT, THEY MAY USE THAT TO
FIND FAMY MEILMBERS, AND THE
PRESIDENT ON THAT LATINO TOWN
HALL LAST WEEK WAS EXPLICIT,
THIS IS ABOUT HEALTH CARE, WE'RE
NOT USING IT TO TRACK DOWN
ILLEGALS.
>> Woodruff: IF THEY KNEW THEY
WERE GOING TO HAVE A PROBLEM
WITH YOUNGER PEOPLE, WHY DIDN'T
THEY START SOONER?
>> I THINK THEY HAVE BEEN
REACHING OUT TO THE YOUNG
PEOPLE.
I MEAN, OBVIOUSLY, YOU'RE GOING
TO HAVE THE MOST INTENSE PUSH IN
THIS LAST MONTH WHEN WE'RE IN
THE LAST THREE WEEKS, YOU WILL
SEE AN INTENSE PUSH, AND YOU SAW
AN INTENSE PUSH RIGHT AROUND THE
END OF DECEMBER WHEN THE
WEB SITE WAS WORKING AND THERE
WAS THE FIRST SET OF DEADLINES,
BUT THEY HAVEN'T GOT AN LOT OF
THEIR MESSAGE ACROSS.
PEOPLE ARE VERY, VERY CONFUSED
ABOUT THE LAW AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ARE HEARING MIXED MESSAGES.
YOU'RE HEARING THE
ADMINISTRATION MESSAGE AND ALSO
HEARING THE CRITICS OF THE LAW
WHO SAY IT'S TOO EXPENSIVE, IT'S
BIG GOVERNMENT, OPENED AN ON.
IT'S VERY HARD FOR PEOPLE, AND
YOUNG PEOPLE TEND TO NOT
THINK -- THAT'S WHY THEY KEEP
ADDRESSING THE MOMS, RIGHT?
YOU KNOW, I HAVE A YOUNG,
INVINCIBLE KID.
HE DOESN'T WORRY ABOUT GETTING
APPEND SITES.
I'M UP HALF THE NIGHT WORRYING
ABOUT IT.
HE'S INSURED ON MY PLAN.
BUT THE MESSAGE IS THEY WANT THE
MOM TO GET THE KID TO SIGN UP.
>> Woodruff: WHAT EXACTLY IS
THE ADMINISTRATION DOING?
THEY HAVE A HUGE MARKETING
CAMPAIGN?
>> THEY'VE GOT A MARKETING
CAMPAIGN AND A SOCIAL MEDIA
CAMPAIGN AND SOME CELEBRITIES
AND DIFFERENT CELEBRITIES APPEAL
TO DIFFERENT GENERATIONS.
THEY HAVE THE INSURANCE INDUSTRY
IS MARKETING.
I'VE GOTTEN MAIL AT MY HOME AND
I'M NOT UNINSURED.
I'VE GOT ENEMAIL FROM INSURANCE
COMPANIES SAYING SIGN UP NOW,
HERE'S YOUR CHANCE.
BUT THE OTHER SIDE IS A LOT OF
CAMPAIGN ADS.
I DON'T KNOW THAT WE'LL EVER
KNOW EXACTLY HOW MUCH HAS BEEN
SPENT ON BOTH SIDES OF THE
ALLIES AND CRITICS AND IT'S
CONFUSING AND THAT'S ONE REASON
PEOPLE DON'T SIGN UP, WE THINK,
BECAUSE PEOPLE DON'T UNDERSTAND
THIS LAW AFTER FOUR YEARS OF
HEARING ABOUT IT.
POLL AFTER POLL SHOWS THEY DON'T
GET IT.
>> Woodruff: LARRY LEVITT, IS
THERE EVIDENCE THIS CAMPAIGN TO
GET PEOPLE TO SIGN UP IS WORKING
OR NOT?
>> WELL, I THINK THERE IS.
I MEAN, IF YOU LOOK -- AS JOANNE
SAID, THEY FELL FAR BEHIND.
THE FIRST TWO MONTHS WERE
BASICALLY LOST THEN THE
WEB SITES WEREN'T WORKING.
BUT ENROLLMENT IS RAMPING UP.
FLORIDA AND TEXAS ARE TWO STATES
WHERE A LOT OF PEOPLE SIGNED UP.
FLORIDA HAD LARGEST NUMBERS OF
ENROLLMENT IN FEBRUARY.
THOSE ARE PLACES WHERE THE
ADMINISTRATION IS TARGETING
BECAUSE THAT'S WHERE A LOT OF
UNINSURED LIVE.
CALIFORNIA, TEXAS AND FLORIDA
REPRESENT 40% OF THE ENROLLMENT
THE LAST MONTH, SO THOSE THREE
STATES ARE GOING TO DRIVE A LOT
OF THE NUMBERS IN THE NEXT THREE
WEEKS.
>> Woodruff: LARRY LEVITT, AS
YOU TALK TO FOLKS IN THE
ADMINISTRATION, ARE THEY
TWEAKING THIS CAMPAIGN AS THEY
GO ALONG, SAYING THIS IS WORKING
OR THIS ISN'T?
I WANT TO GET JOANNE'S TAKE ON
THIS, TOO, BUT, LARRY LEVITT
WHAT HAVE BEEWHAT HAVE YOU BEEN?
>> LATINOS HAVE BEEN THE PRIME
TARGET AND THERE'S A BEEN A PUSH
NOT ONLY IN WASHINGTON BUT THE
STATES OUT HERE IN CALIFORNIA.
THERE'S A LOT OF MARKETING AND
OUTREACH GOING ON BUT IT'S
PROBABLY NOT ENOUGH.
THIS PROGRAM LIKE ANY GOVERNMENT
PROGRAM IS GOING TO TAKE TIME TO
RAMP UP AND IS PROBABLY
PARTICULARLY TRUE HERE BECAUSE
IT'S SO DIVISIVE.
AS JOANNE SAID, THERE AREN'T
JUST ADS TO GET PEOPLE TO SIGN
UP BUT ADS TO GET PEOPLE TO
OPPOSE OR SUPPORT THE LAW STILL
GOING ON.
>> Woodruff: JOANNE KENEN, AS
YOU TALKED TO THE
ADMINISTRATION, WHAT ARE THEY
SAYING?
ARE THEY FRUSTRATED, JUST KNOW
IT'S A LONG SLOG?
>> IF THEY LOOK AT A NUMBER LIKE
4 MILLION, YOU KNOW, ON
OCTOBER 1, SIX PEOPLE SIGNED UP
ON healthcare.gov.
IF YOU SAID FIVE OR SIX MLIONIL
BACK IN OCTOBER OR NOVEMBER,
PEOPLE LOOKED AT YOU LIKE YOU
WERE NUTS.
SO THE AX ACTUARIAL POINT, IT'SN
A SURVIVAL MODE, THEY WON'T MELT
DOWN IMMEDIATELY.
FROM A POLITICAL POINT OF VIEW,
EY'RTHE STILL VULNERABLE.
6 MILLION IS NOT THE ORIGINAL
7 MILLION AND THESE MOVING
TARGETS -- AND THERE ARE GOING
TO BE TENS OF MILLIONS OF
UNINSURED PEOPLE.
IT WASN'T DESIGNED TO COVER A
LOT OF PEOPLE AT ONCE BUT IT'S A
LOT OF MONEY AND EFFORT AND WILL
STILL WILL B A LOT OF UNINSURED
PEOPLE IN AMERICA.
>> Woodruff: WHY DOES IT
MATTER THAT THEY GET A LOT OF
PEOPLE TO SIGN UP?
>> WHY IT MATTERS IS THAT YOUNG
PEOPLE USE FEWER HEALTHCARE
SERVICES THAN THEIR PREMIUMS
REFLECT SO YOU NEED YOUNG PEOPLE
AND PARTICULARLY HEALTHY PEOPLE
TO CROSS SUBSIDIZE THE OLDER AND
SICKER PEOPLE.
SO IF YOU DON'T GET ENOUGH
HEALTHY PEOPLE IN THIS YEAR,
THEN INSURERS MAY LOOK AT THAT
AND RAISE PREMIUMS IN 2015 AND I
THINK THAT WILL BE A KEY METRIC,
EVEN SEW MORE THAN WHETHER WE
GET 5 TO 7 MILLION TO ENROLL
THIS YEAR, IS WILL THE PREMIUMS
GO UP AND IS THE PROGRAM
CONTROLLING COSTS.
>> Woodruff: JOANNE, ANY SENSE
THAT THE ADMINISTRATION WILL LET
THE DEADLINE SLIP?
>> THEY'RE SAYING -- WE'VE SEEN
A LOT OF DEADLINES, BUT THEY'RE
SAYING THIS ONE IS MARCH 31,
THAT THEY CAN'T CHANGE IT.
I EXPECT THERE WILL BE A LITTLE
WIGGLE ROOM.
I DON'T EXPECT IT TO CHANGE BY
MONTHS OR WEEKS.
>> Woodruff: A LITTLE WIGGLE
ROOM?
>> MARCH 31st COULD END UP
BEING EXTENDED.
>> Woodruff: THANK YOU BOTH.
>> Ifill: NOW, JEFFREY BROWN
TALKS TO A FICTION WRITER, AS HE
IMAGINES WHERE THE WORLD IS
HEADING NEXT.
>> Reporter: WE'RE IN THE
FUTURE AFTER MUCH OF THE GLOBE
HAS BECOME AN ENVIRONMENTAL
WASTELAND AND THE U.S. IS
DIVIDED INTO LABOR SETTLEMENTS
WHERE WORKERS TOIL TO PRODUCE
FOOD AND MUCH ELSE, PRIVILEGED
FEW LIVE IN CHARTER VILLAGES AND
EVERYONE ELSE INHABITS THE WILD,
OFTEN VIOLENT COLONIES BEYOND.
A TEENAGE GIRL MAKES HER WAY
THROUGH THIS WORLD SEARCHING FOR
A LOST LOVE.
THE NOVEL IS ENTITLED "ON SUCH A
FULL SEA" AND QUITE A DEPARTURE
FOR AUTHOR CHANG-RAE LEE.
>> GREAT TO BE HERE.
>> Reporter: YOUR ORIGINAL
IDEA WAS TO WRITE A NOVEL OF
SOCIAL REALISM.
>> YES.
>> Reporter: ABOUT CHINESE
LABOR.
SO HOW DID THAT EVOLVE INTO A IF
FUTURESTIC STORY?
>> I HAD GONE TO CHINA TO THE
VILLAGES WHERE THERE ARE LOTS OF
FACTORIES AND VISITED A FACTORY
AND HAD THIS, YOU KNOW, BIG IDEA
TO WRITE THIS BROAD, SOCIAL
NOVEL ABOUT WORKERS, OWNERS, YOU
KNOW, ALL THEIR STRUGGLES.
BUT WHEN I GOT BACK TO MY
WRITING DESK, I FELT AS IF I
DIDN'T HAVE A SPECIAL ANGLE ON
THE MATERIAL, THAT IT WAS GOING
TO BE GOOD JOURNALISM, BUT I
THINK, FOR NOVELS, YOU NEED THE
EXTRA PERSPECTIVE OR OTHER
LAYERS OF APPROACH THAT MAKE THE
STORY, YOU KNOW, COME ALIVE IN A
DIFFERENT WAY.
SO I DROPPED THAT NOVEL AND, AT
THE SAME TIME, YOU KNOW, LOOKING
FOR SOMETHING ELSE, I CAME UPON
A PREMISE ABOUT SETTING A NOVEL
IN THE FUTURE, AND I HAD TO SET
THE NOVEL IN THE FUTURE BECAUSE
THE PREMISE INVOLVED CHINESE
LABORERS EN MASSE TO THE UNITED
STATES, WHICH I KNEW COULDN'T
HAPPEN NOW BUT MIGHT HAPPEN IN A
DIFFERENT TIME.
>> Reporter: THERE IS, OF
COURSE, VERY TRADITIONAL WRITERS
DRAWN TO THIS KIND OF LOOKING AT
THE FUTURE, WHICH IS SORT OF
LIKE IT BUT NOT QUITE.
>> RIGHT.
>> Reporter: WAS IT EXCITING
OR DIFFICULT?
>> IT WAS LIBERATING IN ONE
SENSE, OF COURSE, BECAUSE YOU
HAVE, YOU KNOW, AT YOUR
FINGERTIPS ANYTHING AND
EVERYTHING TO, YOU KNOW, IMAGINE
AND THINK ABOUT.
THE PROBLEM, OF COURSE, IS THAT
SOMETIMES YOU'RE TRAPPED BY YOUR
OWN PREMISE, AND I THINK THAT'S
THE FUN PART ABOUT IT IS TO TRY
TO DEFY THE PREMISE THAT YOU'VE
COME UP WITH AND TO TAKE IT INTO
DIFFERENT DIRECTIONS.
>> Brown: AND YOUR PAST WORK
IS MORE OBSERVED IN OUR TIME.
HERE I GUESS IT WAS WHY.
>> MY PREVIOUS NOVELS ARE
PSYCHOLOGICALLY REALISTIC, VERY
CLES ON VIEWS OF PEOPLE WHO --
IMMIGRANTS SOMETIMES, OTHERS WHO
ARE SORT OF, YOU KNOW, AT A
CROSSROADS IN TERMS OF HOW THEY
FEEL ABOUT THEMSELVES IN THEIR
FAMILIES OR COMMUNITIES.
IN SOME SENSE, THIS NOVEL, IT'S
NOT THAT DIFFERENT.
>> Brown: ONCE YOU GET INTO
IT.
>> ONCE YOU GET INTO IT, THE
WORK ITSELF IS NOT ACTUALLY ALL
THAT RADICAL.
WHAT IS RADICAL IS THAT, ONCE
YOU CHANGE THE CONTEXT AROUND
THESE FIGURES, AND THEY'RE STILL
HUMAN BEINGS, OF COURSE, ONCE
YOU CHANGE THE CONTEXT OR
CIRCUMSTANCE RADICALLY, YOU
REALIZE THAT THINGS INSIDE
CHANGE.
MORALITY CHANGES.
PRACTICES CHANGE.
SUDDENLY PEOPLE ARE FORMED AND
DEFORMED IN VERY INTERESTING
WAYS.
>> Brown: WHAT ALSO WE BEGIN
TO REALIZE AND, FOR ME, WE SPEND
A LOT OF TIME ON THIS PROGRAM
LOOKING AT SOCIAL ISSUES,
OBVIOUSLY, AND ECONOMIC
DIVISIONS IN THE SOCIETY, AND
THEN HERE IT'S NOTABLE YOU'VE
CREATED THIS WORLD OF DEEP
DIVISIONS, CLASS, SOCIETY,
INDUSTRIAL, EVERYTHING'S RUN
DOWN, RIGHT, THE WORLD IS SORT
OF GROUND DOWN ECONOMICALLY, IN
A SENSE.
SO DID YOU HAVE THIS WORLD IN
MIND AS WELL?
>> WELL, ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
I WAS INTERESTED IN, THAT
ORIGINAL NOVEL ABOUT CHINA SET
IN CONTEMPORARY TIMES, THE FLIP
SIDE OF THAT WAS THE CENTER OF
AMERICAN STAGNATION AND PERHAPS
DECLINE AND THAT'S ONE OF THE
THINGS I BROUGHT OVER FROM THE
ORIGINAL RESEARCH, AN IDEA THAT
CERTAIN TRENDS IN OUR SOCIETY,
BOTH SOCIAL AND POLITICAL, WERE
OBVIOUSLY THINGS I HAVE ANXIETY
ABOUT, THAT I WAS WORRIED ABOUT.
I THINK ALL SPECULATIVE FICTION
HAS AS ITS ORIGIN POINT PRESENT
CONCERNS, AND THOSE CONCERNS
ABOUT CLASS ENTRENCHMENT, ABOUT
INCOME AND EQUALITY, ABOUT
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTAMINATION,
ABOUT HEALTH CARE BEING SO
PRECARIOUS IN OUR SOCIETY.
I THINK THOSE ARE THINGS THAT,
YOU KNOW, HAVE BEEN MULLING FOR
THE LAST TEN, 15 YEARS.
>> Brown: BEFORE YOU BECAME A
WRITER, YOU ACTUALLY WORKED ON
WALL STREET FOR A YEAR.
>> I DID.
I HAD A JOB THERE.
>> Brown: THERE'S SOMETHING
ABOUT THIS IS ALL IN THE PAST,
RIGHT?
THINGS ABOUT WEALTH AND POVERTY?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, I TOOK A JOB
ON WALL STREET.
I'M GLAD I DID, BECAUSE IT WAS
MY ONLY REALLY -- YOU KNOW, MY
ONE TRUE DAY JOB I EVER HAD.
BUT THAT WAS A JOB AS AN
IMMIGRANT KID FROM A FAMILY WHO
HAD STRUGGLED AND WORKED HARD TO
PUT ME THROUGH A GOOD AMERICAN
EDUCATION, IT WAS A LITTLE PAY
BACK FOR THAT.
>> Brown: LET ME ASK YOU ONE
MORE THING, BECAUSE I'M CURIOUS
ABOUT YOUR CHOICE OF MAIN
CHARACTERS.
A 16-YEAR-OLD GIRL, PHAN.
WHY TELL THE STORY THROUGH HER?
>> I WANTED SOMEONE WHO WAS AN
INNOCENT, A TRUE INNOCENT, AND
SHE'S PROBABLY NOT A LOT UNLIKE
16-YEAR-OLDS TODAY.
I THINK SHE'S PURER THAN THAT,
MORE INNOCENT THAN THAT.
I WANTED SOMEONE WHO COULD
ALMOST BE A VESSEL FOR THE
IMAGINATION OF THOSE WHO ARE
TELLING HER STORY, SO THAT SHE'S
THIS SORT OF ELEMENTAL FORCE
GOING OUT INTO THE WORLD, INTO
THIS ADVENTURE, AND THAT WE
WOULD BE DRAWN BY NOT HER
PSYCHOLOGY OR HER PHILOSOPHY OR
HER LEADERSHIP, EVEN, BUT BY
THIS KIND OF PURE AND FIERCE
PERSISTENCE THAT SHE HAS.
>> Brown: I'M NOT GIVING AWAY
WHAT HAPPENS, BUT DO YOU IN THE
END SEE THIS AS KIND OF WINNING
OR DID IT JUST BECOME A GOOD
STORY FOR YOU?
>> WELL, IN THE PROCESS, I WAS
JUST ENJOYING THE STORYTELLING.
I THINK WHAT BEGAN TO OCCUR AND
ALMOST SURPRISED ME AS I WENT
ALONG IS HOW MUCH OF MY CONCERNS
CAME OUT IN THE BOOK.
I NEVER INTENDED TO WRITE A
POLITICAL NOVEL, AND I DON'T
THINK I'LL EVER INTEND TO WRITE
A POLITICAL NOVEL, BUT PERHAPS
OUT OF ALL MY BOOKS, THIS ONE IS
MORE POINTEDLY LOOKING AT ISSUES
OF OUR TIME.
>> Brown: ALL RIGHT, CHANG-RAE
LEE, THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> GREAT TO BE HERE.
>> Ifill: WE'LL BE RIGHT BACK
WITH A LOOK AT THE AMAZING
AMOUNT OF ICE THIS WINTER HAS
BROUGHT TO THE GREAT LAKES.
BUT FIRST THIS IS PLEDGE WEEK ON
P.B.S.
THIS BREAK ALLOWS YOUR PUBLICD R
TOP COUNTIES IN THE U.S. FOR
CHILDHOOD HUNGER.
>> Ifill: FINALLY TONIGHT, THIS
BRUTALLY COLD WINTER HAS CREATED
AN ICY WONDERLAND ON THE SURFACE
OF THE GREAT LAKES.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT ELIZABETH
BRACKETT OF W.T.T.W., CHICAGO
VENTURED OUT TO SEE IT.
>> Reporter: THE SUN IS JUST
BEGINNING TO RISE OVER CHICAGO'S
ICE CLOGGED HARBOR.
DOCKED AT NAVY PIER, THE COAST
GUARD'S ICE CUTTER, THE BISCAYNE
BAY, STARTS GEARING UP FOR A
LONG DAY.
BREAKING A TRACK THROUGH THE
HARBOR ICE THE BISCAYNE BAY
HEADS OUT TO CLEAR SHIPPING
LANES ON LAKE MICHIGAN.
THE SHIP IS BASED IN NORTHERN
MICHIGAN NEAR THE STRAITS OF
MACKINAC IT'S RARE THAT THE ICE
BREAKERS ARE NEEDED IN THE
SOUTHERN HALF OF THE LAKE.
>> THIS IS ACTUALLY OUR 1ST TIME
THIS WINTER DOWN TO THE IN SOUTH
END OF LAKE MICHIGAN SO I CAN'T
SAY WHAT IT'S BEEN LIKE HERE BUT
IN THE STRAITS IT'S THE WORST
WINTER IN 25 YEARS.
>> Reporter: THE HULL OF THE 140
FOOT LONG ICE BREAKER IS
REINFORCED WITH EXTRA STEEL
AROUND THE WATER LINE AND BOW.
POWERFUL BUBBLERS ON THE BOW AND
STERN SHOOT OUT AIR THAT HELPS
LUBRICATE THE HULL AGAINST THE
ICE, RATHER THAN CUTTING THE ICE
THE SHIP ACTS LIKE A SMALL TANK
AND JUST PLOWS RIGHT THROUGH IT.
>> WE CALL THAT PLATE ICE 8 TO
10 INCHES THICK RIGHT NOW NOT
TOO BAD, YOU CAN SEE SOME OF THE
PLATE HAS BROKEN UP RIGHT THERE
ONCE THAT STARTS PILING UP ON
ITSELF IT CREATES A WIND ROW
MAKES IT DIFFICULT FOR US TO GET
THROUGH THE ICE.
>> Reporter: ABOUT AN HOUR OUT
OF CHICAGO THE BISCAYNE BAY HIT
A WIND ROW.
AS THE HEAVY ICE SLOWED THE BOAT
ORDERS WERE GIVEN FOR MORE
AGGRESSIVE ICE-BREAKING
MANEUVERS
>> THIS IS WHERE WE BACK AND RAM
PUT BOAT IN A SURGE PROPULSION,
WE'LL BACK UP ABOUT THREE SHIP
LENGTHS AND THEN GO AS FAST AS
WE CAN HIT THIS WINDROW AND COME
UP OVER THE ICE AND CONTINUE ON.
>> Reporter: THE GREAT LAKES
HAVEN'T SEEN THIS MUCH ICE SINCE
1979.
THE GREAT LAKES ENVIRONMENTAL
RESEARCH LABORATORY REPORTS THAT
91% OF ALL OF THE GREAT LAKES
HAVE BEEN COVERED WITH ICE THIS
WINTER.
LAKES SUPERIOR, HURON, AND ERIE
LEAD THE WAY WITH 95% COVERAGE.
LAKE MICHIGAN IS NEXT WITH 93%
COVERAGE AND LAKE ONTARIO WITH
40%.
THE EXTENSIVE COVERAGE SURPRISES
EVEN LONG TIME OBSERVERS OF THE
LAKE LIKE JOEL BRAMMEIER WITH
THE ALLINACE FOR THE GREAT
LAKES.
>> THE IDEA OF THE GREAT LAKES
FREEZING OVER ENTIRELY IS SIMPLY
SOMETHING THAT DOES NOT HAPPEN.
IN FACT EVEN IN LAKE SUPERIOR,
THE LAST TIME LAKE SUPERIOR
FROZE OVER WAS IN THE MID-
NINETIES.
SO THIS IS A VERY SPECIAL
UNUSUAL WINTER.
>> Reporter: THIS YEAR THE COAST
GUARD HAS BEEN NEEDED TO KEEP
THE SOUTHERN SHIPPING LANES
OPEN.
ON THIS DAY, THE BISCAYNE BAY
WORKED TO CLEAR A PATH FOR A TUG
TRYING TO PUSH A BARGE INTO THE
ICE COVERED PORT OF INDIANA AT
BURNS HARBOR, AFTER SEVERAL
PASSES BY THE CUTTER THE BARGE
FINALLY MADE IT TO DOCK TO
DELIVER A LOAD OF SCRAP IRON.
BUT THE ICE HAS HELD UP OTHER
SHIPS AND BARGES.
THE LAKE CARRIERS ASSOCIATION
REPORTS SHIPPING HAS DROPPED 30%
THIS WINTER.
BRIAN LARUE SAYS HIS COMPANY'S
BARGES SHOULD BE LINED UP ALONG
THE PIER HERE IN THE PORT OF
INDIANA.
>> WE'VE GOT 18 BAES WRGAITING
TO BE BROUGHT OUT OUR TERMINAL
ALL EMPLOYEES WAITING FOR THESE
BARGES TO GET IN PLACE SO THEY
CAN COME TO WORK LOTS OF WORK TO
BE DONE
>> Reporter: BUT ALL THIS ICE IS
NOT ALL BAD NEWS FOR THE LAKES.
>> MORE WINTER ICE COVER IS
ACTUALLY GOOD FOR THE LAKES,
BECAUSE IT STOPS WATER FROM
EVAPORATING, AND THE LAST
SEVERAL YEARS AND IN FACT FOR
THE LAST DECADE, WE HAVE SEEN
RECORD AND NEAR RECORD LOW WATER
LEVELS IN LAKES MICHIGAN AND
HURON.
WITH THE HIGH LEVELS OF SNOW
FALL AND THE HIGH LEVELS OF ICE
WE ARE PROBABLY GOING TO SEE A
BIG UP TICK OF WATER LEVELS COME
SPRING OF 2014.
>> Reporter: IT'S NOT JUST THE
ICE CAP THAT IS KEEPING
EVAPORATION RATES DOWN.
HIGH EVAPORATION RATES OCCUR
WHEN THERE IS COOL AIR OVER WARM
WATER.
THE WATER COOLED VERY QUICKLY
THIS FALL, DROPPING EVAPORATION
RATES DRAMATICALLY FROM PREVIOUS
YEARS.
BECAUSE OF THIS, SCIENTISTS ARE
NOW PREDICTING NEARLY A THREE-
FOOT RISE IN WATER LEVELS WHICH
WOULD BRING LAKE LEVELS BACK UP
TO THE LONG TERM AVERAGE BY NEXT
AUGUST.
>> THAT'S GREAT NEWS.
THE HIGHER THE WATER LEVELS,
THAT MEANS THE DEEPER THE SHIPS
WE CAN ACCOMMODATE HERE AT THE
PORT.
SO WHEN WE HEAR THE WATER LEVELS
ARE BEING RAISED THAT'S ALWAYS A
GOOD SIGN FOR US.
>> Reporter: BUT SPRING IS STILL
A LONG WAY OFF FOR SHIPPERS AND
THE CREW OF THE BISCAYNE BAY
WHERE 17-HOUR DAYS HAVE NOT BEEN
UNCOMMON.
THOUGH THE SHIPS CAPTAIN TOM
PRZYBYLA IS NOT COMPLAINING.
>> IT'S ALMOST LIKE BEING IN
ANOTHER WORLD IT DOESN'T FEEL
LIKE YOU'RE OUT ON THE LAKE AT
ALL, IT'S VIBRATING, THE SHIP IS
MOVING, SOMETIMES THERE'S BIG
COLLISIONS WHERE THE ENTIRE SHIP
WILL SHIFT OFF TO THE SIDE A
LITTLE BIT YOU SORT OF LOOSE
YOUR FOOTING AS YOUR WALKING
AROU.ND
I'VE HEARD IT DESCRIBED AS LIKE
LIVING IN AN EARTHQUAKE.
YOU KNOW IT'S LIKE LOOKING OUT
AT THE ICE ITS ALMOST LIKE
YOU'RE LOOKING AT THE SURFACE OF
THE MOON OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT
BECAUSE IT JUST GOES FOR MILES
AND MILES.
>> Reporter: THE BISCAYNE BAY
HEADS BACK UP NORTH AFTER
OPENING A TRACK IN THE PORT OF
INDIANA.
THERE WILL BE LITTLE DOWN TIME
AS THE ICE BREAKER CONTINUES TO
TACKLE THE MOST ICE SEEN IN THE
GREAT LAKES IN DECADES.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
THE SEARCH FOR THE MISSING
MALAYSIAN AIRLINES FLIGHT TOOK A
NEW TURN, WITH REPORTS THE PLANE
WAS SPOTTED HUNDREDS OF MILES
OFF COURSE.
AND CRIMEA'S PARLIAMENT VOTED TO
DECLARE INDEPENDENCE FROM
UKRAINE, IF IT'S PEOPLE VOTE IN
FAVOR OF JOINING RUSSIA IN A
SUNDAY REFERENDUM.
>> Woodruff: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE, WE'RE LAUNCHING OUR
LATEST PBS NEWSHOUR/AL-MONITOR
TRENDLINES SPECIAL.
TOMORROW MORNING, WE EXAMINE
WHAT IMPACT THE CRISIS IN
UKRAINE IS HAVING ON THE MIDDLE
EAST WITH GUESTS IN ISRAEL,
IRAN, AND THE UNITED STATES.
IT WILL BE STREAMED ON OUR
WEBSITE WEDNESDAY MORNING AT 10
A.M. EASTERN
>> Woodruff: ALL THAT AND MORE
IS ON OUR WEB SITE,
newshour.pbs.org.
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON WEDNESDAY, HOW THE OUTCOME OF
A CLOSELY-WATCHED SPECIAL
ELECTION COULD PROVIDE CLUES TO
THIS YEAR'S FIGHT FOR CONTROL OF
CONGRESS.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.